it leaves me open mouth in amazement
that we in the developed world with our
functional economies and our high level
of luxury and security
can say to developing Worlds the
developing World well you know we've
gotten pretty good here and we're
probably willing to cut back a little
bit but you guys down there in the
developing countries you know you should
be pretty damn careful about your carbon
output we're not going to help you
develop your economy so that you can
benefit from the same Industrial
Revolution that have that has that has
that has enabled us to educate our
children and to have plenty to eat and
to be warm in the winter and cool in the
summer and then what's all even more
Preposterous is it's the very people who
are constantly clamoring about the
oppressive nature of Western culture who
are foisting this very story on these
developed countries yeah the irony is
that even if the African nations
were given you know the carbon credits
or whatever and allowed to develop
to where they want to be and where
anyone expects them to be at most they
would be emitting like five or six
percent of global emissions and this is
for like a billion people in the
population we're not talking about a lot
of extra emissions to allow them to
develop I mean it just makes absolutely
no sense and it's evil it's absolutely
evil
[Music]
hello everyone on YouTube and Associated
platforms I'm here today with another
climate denialist because you know I've
been racking those up
um it's all part of my attempt to become
the most reprehensible commentator on
YouTube and so uh at least in the eyes
of my of those who think they're my
enemies anyways I'm talking to Dr Judith
Curry today very accomplished scientist
she's an American climatologist with a
bachelor in science degree in geography
Sharon doubt at Northern Illinois
University and a geophysical Sciences
PhD from the University of Chicago
Curry is the professor emirita and
former chair of the school of Earth and
atmospheric sciences at the Georgia
Institute of Technology she's had an
accomplished career working with NASA
the U.S government and numerous academic
institutions in the field of climate
change a real scientist with 190
Publications Curry advocates
so reprehensively for a non-alarmist
approach acknowledging Earth's Rising
temperature with a grain of salt the
grain being in-field research and a
refusal to shut the doors of science to
those with contrary views and findings
in 2017 Dr Curry retired from her
position at the Georgia Institute of
Technology citing
the poisonous nature of the scientific
discussion around man-made climate
change as a key factor Curry co-founded
and acts as president of the climate
forecast applications Network a company
a private company which seeks to
translate cutting-edge weather and
climate Research into tenable forecast
products insurance companies financial
institutions rely on Dr Curry to provide
them with information that can guide
them with regard to their future
financial decision making
she's a controversial figure on the
climate front being somewhat of a
contrarian with in regard to the
hypothetically the hypothetical
scientific consensus on the climate
apocalypse front so the first thing I'd
like to ask you Dr Curry is if you would
walk people through your professional
qualifications and to let everyone know
why it is that you might be regarded as
a credible commentator on such issues
okay well I received my PhD in 1982 in
geophysical Sciences from the University
of Chicago
and I spent my entire career in Academia
um
with jobs at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison Purdue University Penn
State University
University of Colorado Boulder and most
recently at the Georgia Institute of
Technology and at Georgia Tech I served
as chair of the school of Earth and
atmospheric sciences for 13 years
I've written
several books and published about 190
Journal articles I'm a fellow of several
major professional societies have you
know received some recognition for my
research
I left my University position
in 2017. I felt it was too constraining
um I wanted to
do a broader range of things and I had
started a company
about 10 years before it was a startup
under Georgia Tech's you know Venture
lab
program and so then I started devoting
full time to it after I left Academia
um
I inadvertently stepped into the
Limelight on the
global warming issue in 2005. if you
recall at the time of Hurricane Katrina
which devastated New Orleans
I and my co-authors had a paper that was
published in the Journal of science
two weeks after Katrina hit
um
and we we had found that the percentage
of category four and five hurricanes
had doubled in recent decades okay and
so this was
with rather explosive media attention
and this was
you know the first time you know that I
did TV interviews or anything like that
and it was a very
a very antagonistic debate people were
coming at us from all sides of course
the Enviro advocacy groups thought
you know I was the greatest thing since
sliced bread but there are a lot of
people on the other side of the debate
you know thought I was absolutely evil
um
so so for the first time I started you
know giving a lot of public lectures and
it
and people would invariably ask me
questions that were you know outside of
my expertise or knowledge everyone was
asking about the hockey stick for
example or what's going on with the sun
and all these kind of things I figured
oh my gosh you know I really need to
just step out beyond my personal areas
of expertise and try to understand a lot
more of this you know so so which I did
and
eventually the hurricane and global
warming issues settled down a little bit
and then a few years later
climate Gates struck this was in
November of 2009 with the unauthorized
release of
emails from the University of East
Anglia it was it was a big it was a very
big scandal at the time ipcc authors
hiding the decline you know Mike's
nature trick all this kind of stuff
um you know and it it was hugely
important politically and it's believed
to have derailed the Waxman Marky
a bill that was you know making progress
you know towards being passed and it's
just pretty much derailed it and I took
the controversial you know
step of saying help you know we need to
do better we need to make all of our our
data publicly available we need to make
our methods transparent we need to pay
more attention to uncertainty and be
more honest about the level of
confidence we actually have in this
stuff and we also need to pay attention
to Skeptics you know and treat them with
respect and you know pay attention to
their arguments and refute them if
they're serious
and you know to me this sounded like
motherhood and apple pie right right
absolutely okay but um the people within
the climate Community were very angry at
me saying that I needed to be more
sensitive to the feelings of these
scientists who were involved
excuse me no one was sensitive to my
feelings during the hurricane and global
warming Wars and also I wasn't worried
about their feelings I was worried about
the ipcc and The credibility of it and
you know what we what we should be doing
about this you know they were much
bigger issues at stake here than the um
feelings of these scientists well
anybody any scientist who talks to you
about whether you're hurting their
feelings when you're launching a
discussion of the factual basis of their
claims has immediately stepped outside
of the scientific domain I mean one of
the things I loved about being a
scientist was that the rules of
engagement at professional conferences
let's say that were genuinely scientific
in nature were pretty damn clear I mean
we were discussing the
empirical reliable empirical and
statistical reliability and validity of
your claims on a technical basis that
was that and if we weren't doing that it
wasn't science and so the idea that what
you should be attending to when you're
criticizing someone's work which doesn't
mean denigrating it it means trying to
separate the wheat from the chaff by the
way that has nothing to do with your
regard for the emotional well-being of
your say antagonist I mean you could be
polite and that's helpful but it's also
not mandatory right but well there's a
subtlety here because I was not so much
criticizing the substance of the science
but the behavior of the scientists that
I felt violated the Norms of Science in
terms of you know everybody you know
universalism you know everybody should
you know have a chance or a shot you
know we
at the data
um we should listen to Skeptics you know
and we should try to
keep politics out of our science to the
extent that we can I mean these are the
kind of behaviors you know these emails
reveal people trying to get editors
fired you know playing fast and loose
with the guidelines of the ipcc
evade Freedom of Information Act
requests
um from people they thought would
challenge their research this kind of
behavior that I strenuously objected to
and I thought that we should not defend
and we should call out so I was not
challenging the substance of anybody's
science it was really the behavior
in the public debate well right well
that is that is a form of that is a form
in some sense of methodological
criticism right I mean your point was
that your there's rules to to the
investigative process and the
communication process and politicization
breaks those rules and the response on
the front of the climate apocalypse
apocalypse let's say you see this with
biologists who are concerned about
Extinction from time to time too is that
well this this issue is so important
that it's unethical to abide by those
normative principles because we need to
do everything we can to draw as much
attention to this looming catastrophe as
possible and in some sense All is fair
in Love and War and that would be fine
if they were correct and 100 correct
possibly although I still think they're
violating the science politics
distinction but when there's doubt and
there's substantial doubt here then
that's a real problem I wanted to take
apart some of the things you said so you
came at this in a very interesting way
and some sense because the first time
that you Rose to something approximating
public prominence you were actually
putting forth a set of propositions that
you could argue supported a more dire
view of climate outcome right making the
claim that these hurricanes severe
hurricanes had increased in frequency do
you believe now that have they continued
to increase in frequency or was that a
momentary Spike do you know that
literature still oh oh yes it's um okay
first off there were lots of pot shots
thrown at us okay the couple of
criticisms turned out to be valid one is
that the the global data before 1985 is
pretty dodgy you know we went back to
1970s so we you know so realistically
you have to throw out 15 years and the
other thing was looking at you know just
the natural variability and could really
distinguish a warming signal from the
natural variability and at this point we
still can't with a lot of confidence so
yeah well a big a big part of the
problem here is you know what time frame
over this is a huge problem and I don't
even know how you solve it in some sense
if you're trying to define something
like a trend towards cooling or warming
or increased or decreased variability
the question that immediately arises
well are you talking about a hundred
years or a thousand or ten thousand or a
million like there's an infinite number
of time frames consider and exactly that
that is that that is a key Challenge and
one of my major themes you know coming
out of the climate gate thing was a more
serious look at uncertainty and I wrote
a paper called climate change and the
uncertainty monster and I use that paper
a series of you know to launch my blog
climate Etc Judith curry.com in
2010 and
again this was people outside The Clique
of establishment climate scientists
thought this was great this is important
this is obvious however within the
clique they viewed me as trying to
destroy a consensus that they had been
trying to build for 20 years well this
whole manufactured consensus and it was
on very flimsy ground you know so and
there was okay how would you care how
would you characterize that so-called
consensus is that associated with this
idea I talked to Richard Franzen about
this recently
um
is that associated with the idea that
like 97 percent of scientists agree that
well it isn't clear what they agree
that's the issue is that climate change
is a severe and catastrophic problem
which is that that statement in itself
is not true by any stretch of the
imagination what's the consensus here oh
okay the the issue is the ipcc the
intergovernmental panel on climate
change they did their first assessment
report in like 1991 and following that I
mean that was a good report it was a
good assessment at the time and then the
powers that be says we need to strive
for consensus in our statements and so
this sort of narrowed the framing and
the people they were picking to be on
the committee were people who were all
going to agree and so they were working
to manufacture a consensus you know it
was their view of how the policy process
deals with uncertainty so it was sort of
a
speaking consensus to power approach and
and this was like formalized by the ipcc
and you know people challenging
the consensus and there's many
dimensions to it but but the most
fundamental one is that
most of the warming that we've seen
since 1950 is caused by humans I mean
that's the most Central
that there is warming that there is
warming even though now the narrative is
changed that there is warming there's a
certain idea about its potential
magnitude and then hypothetically the
consensus is that what about 50 of that
is no no not an activity no they used to
make the statement more than half but
they really meant 100 percent
okay but there's certainly no con
there's certainly no scientific
consensus that a hundred percent of the
global warming that's occurring at the
moment is anthropogenic that I don't
believe it
oh no no no no there isn't the scientist
okay there's no measure I mean
when you have
a complex highly uncertain situation
like this the issue of consensus is
scientifically meaningless it's only
meaningful right you know for political
purposes this whole idea
um of speaking consensus to power that
that was some pathway you know to policy
making it hasn't really turned out to be
um
it yeah so so yeah there's no consensus
the most well it's also it's also a
Preposterous claim scientifically
because the way science works is that
a great scientist
is the first person who challenges the
consensus that's kind of how you define
a great scientist and one of the things
that's so wonderful about science is
that it can reveal when the universal
consensus is wrong
and it it's it's powerful in its methods
precisely because of that and you know
that as a practicing researcher is that
the probability that you're going to do
a study and that the data is going to
reveal
the consensus of your lab Theory the
validity of the consensus of your Labs
theory is basically zero something
unexpected is going to crop up when you
actually test your idea against reality
itself so the idea that science is
consensus based is is wrong it's wrong
yeah it's okay it's amazing that the
idea got anywhere okay look at the
social factors in play okay there was a
big drive by the U.N
you know to deal with human you know
dangerous anthropogenic climate change
again this was a 1992 treaty before we
even had any evidence of human cause
warming at all okay and then you had
scientists become invested in this you
know in their career goals and the
funding that comes into the field and
all of this kind of stuff that there was
a this sort of social contract between
the scientists and the policy makers
that perpetuated this situation and you
know and they were the policy makers
they we need you know more you know we
need more and more confident statements
from the ipcc even though the dimensions
of the problem were growing and growing
and growing every year and clearly
becoming more complex and obvious that
there was a lot of things that we didn't
understand but there was this drive you
know well it it it's not as if the IPC
documents themselves or even that
radical I mean my understanding of the
IPC doc C documents is that the
projection is something like one to two
degrees of further warming with some
increase in variability especially in
the polar regions and a small degree of
sea level rise no indication in the ipcc
reports that this will produce runaway
out of control feedback loop that will
have a devastating consequence no real
vision of Apocalypse um and so that's
not quite correct um until okay until
recently
people were looking at projections of
four to five degrees Centigrade more
warming over the course of the 21st
Century
okay the the
issue was wildly ridiculous emissions
projections which are now believed to be
implausible
the more recent ipcc assessment Report
with more plausible emissions scenarios
is looking at more two to three degrees
Centigrade of warming
and we've already had one degree so it's
an additional one to two degrees
Centigrade of warming that people expect
based on the climate models so that they
were pretty alarming up until recently
because everyone was focused on this
extreme Omission scenario which is now
widely accepted as implausible if not
impossible
so there was a lot of alarm and all the
you know when you talk about all the
projections of extreme weather events
and we won't be able to grow wine in
California and crazy projections of sea
level rise all these projections were
tied to that extreme emission scenario
and it's taking a community a long time
to reject it in fact this extreme
Omission scenario was still the most
often the most widely used in the
six assessment report which was
published only like
two years ago
so I mean that this is still pervasive
these excessively alarming
projections of what could happen in the
21st century mostly driven by
implausible to Impossible emission
scenario but also driven by climate
models that are running too hot okay
let's go into that a bit so so I I
talked to Richard lindsen about a week
ago about the problems with models he
said for example that the models are
based on cells let's say so those would
be the the whole earth can't be modeled
so you have to oversimplify it you have
to Clump it into chunks and the chunks
are about 70 miles wide I think they
don't they can't really model Cloud
activity very well there's a lot of
error in relationship to projecting and
forecasting the effect of water vapor
um the models the models have to build a
lot of assumptions in and that doesn't
mean that we shouldn't build models but
it does mean that they have very large
potential for error and that error is
magnified as you project out into the
future and so I've read for example you
tell me if you think this is accurate
that are estimates of the cumulative
effect of carbon dioxide on global
warming or climate change are smaller
than our estimates of the magnitude of
our error in measuring the effect of
water vapor and like that's a big
problem because water vapor is a major
contributor to to warming in principle
and so that's carbon dioxide effects are
under the size of the error in that
measurement that's really well well I I
wouldn't put it that way
um
we have a pretty good idea of how much
water vapor is in the atmosphere the
question is how is that going to change
with warming the bigger issue is the
clouds what clouds are doing clouds have
a huge and they're not modeled very well
and the observational basis for
you know understanding how they're
trending you know only goes back a few
decades
so you know that's a tough one but but
the
the net result of these uncertainties in
water vapor and Cloud feedback is that
we don't know how sensitive the climate
is to increasing CO2 because the way the
model is treated is that CO2 and clouds
amplify the warming
um and what and I think the cloud
feedback might even be negative
water vapor does overall amplify the
warming but in the tropics where Richard
lynson has done his research he
proposes that there is a negative
feedback and that's something that's
hotly debated but I think the clouds are
the bigger issue but apart from what's
going on in the atmosphere to me it's
really the oceans and the Sun that are
the biggest
um sources of uncertainty in terms of
understanding what's going on and be
able to project into the future
so there are okay why the oceans oh my
goodness okay the the oceans have these
large
circulation systems overturning okay
that
El Nino La Nina people are familiar with
that that's a mode of natural internal
variability there's also decadal and
multi decadal
oscillations cycles that change the
patterns of clouds the whole patterns of
sea surface temperature influences
snowfall on Greenland the Arctic sea ice
rainfall Regional climates Etc and the
models don't treat these very good well
there's a whole spectrum of these ocean
circulations all on out to ten thousand
years you have Millennial scale
overturning that influences the climate
and the models have
far too little power
you know in in that part of the spectrum
so we're just missing that and then so
is that is that a consequence does that
mean that the degree to which the ocean
takes up carbon dioxide is is permeated
by error in measurement is it is it also
an indication of our lack of
understanding of how the temperature of
the ocean itself is regulated by the
motion of water from the depths up to
the top all of that oh yeah is that
where the error is well no it vertical
transport of heat and carbon in the
ocean as part of the consequences of the
uncertainty in these large-scale
circulations but more fundamentally
these large-scale you know they change
the weather patterns and change the
clouds among other things so
you know this is trying to get all that
modeled right let alone make incredible
predictions into the future we're not
there I mean not even close to being
there okay and and then if if you once
you get into the sun it's even you know
crazier I mean the ipcc
has pretty much dismissed the role of
the sun you know in the last 150 years
but the interesting thing is that in the
six assessment report chapter six they
finally acknowledged the great
uncertainty in the amount of solar
forcing in the late 20th century and
this arises from there was a gap in this
satellites measuring the sun output that
occur at the time of the Challenger
shuttle disaster if you recall that
um and and so one solar sensor was
running out and they were supposed to
launch another one but all the launches
were put off for a number of years until
they sorted out what was going on
um at Nasa with the launches and
everything so there's this so-called Gap
and depending on what was actually
happening in that Gap
you know you can tune tune the solar
variability to high variability or low
variability so all the climate models
are being run with low solar variability
forcing but for the first time
chapter 2 in the observational chapter
of the six assessment report acknowledge
this issue that there is huge amount of
variability
and this doesn't even factor in the
so-called solar indirect effects in
terms of there's a lot of it's not just
the heat from the Sun there's a lot of
issues related to ultraviolet and
Stratosphere and cosmic rays and
magnetic fields and all these other
things that really aren't being factored
in they're at the Forefront of research
but they're certainly not factored into
the climate models so there are so many
uncertainties out there
um
that affect
certainly the projections of what might
happen in the 21st century but also our
interpretation of what's been going on
with the climate for the last 100 years
ago and exactly what's been causing what
[Music]
the current administration's New Year's
goals are to tax spend and turn a blind
eye to inflation if this is at odds with
your goals if you are tired of the
government playing games with your
savings and your retirement plans then
you need to get in touch with the
experts at Birch gold today for over 5
000 years goldas withstood inflation
geopolitical turmoil and stock market
crashes with help from the experts at
Birch gold you can own gold and attack
sheltered retirement account Birch gold
makes it easy to convert an IRA or 401K
into an IRA in Precious Metals just text
Jordan to 989898 to claim your free info
kit on gold and then talk to one of
their precious metals Specialists Birch
gold will hold your hand through the
entire process text Jordan to 989898 and
protect yourself with gold today with an
A plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau thousands of happy customers and
countless five-star reviews you can
trust Birch gold to help protect your
savings text Jordan to
989898 today
[Music]
well so I would say that those who
object to the line of reasoning that
you're putting forward I believe would
make an argument analogous to the
following they would say well look we
have despite all the objections on the
measurement front we have pretty good
evidence that there's a warming Trend we
have reasonable evidence that at least a
reasonable proportion of that is a
consequence of anthropogenic activity
most particularly the production of
carbon dioxide the potential consequence
of of this could be apocalyptic a
hundred years down the road or 50 years
down the road even with all those doubts
in mind it's incumbent upon us to take
something like emergency action now so
that we ameliorate this risk of
apocalyptic transformation and so this
is just okay obstructionist hand-waving
your objections and if you were moral
and on board you'd see that this issue
is so serious and so apocalyptic that
it's inappropriate to stand in the way
of the amelioration and so so what what
do you think about that as a counter
proposition okay the weakest part of
their argument is whether all this is
dangerous
um you know the sea level rise is you
know creeping up you know the ice cap
Greenland Antarctic you know it changes
from year to year with a little bit of
melting but there's no
catastrophe looming on those fronts and
so they've turned to extreme weather
oh global warming is calling and I have
to say the hurricane and global warming
first put this idea into their head ah
you know if we can show that even one
degree can cause something bad like more
category five hurricanes then we have
something so so this started this whole
trend of every extreme weather event is
associated with um
human cause global warming which just
isn't true right and and if you look
back and and they tend to go back to
1970 or 1950. oh this is the
warmest year the worst storm or the
biggest drought or whatever since 1970
maybe since 1950 but if you're looking
um to the first half of the 20th century
the weather was way worse certainly in
North America and over much of the globe
also
um right now in the U.S West
um we're being assaulted by these
atmospheric River events bringing huge
amounts of rain and snow which is going
to cause flooding it's still snow yet
and you know this is horrible global
warming and everything like that but
if if you go back to the winter of 1861
and 1862
15 inches of rain and fell in central
um California over a period of a couple
of months which huge floods over a very
widespread area that lasted for absolute
months okay and paleoclimate
evidence showed that these tend to
happen about every 200 years or so where
you have this massive accumulation of
these atmospheric Rivers so this is
nothing at all unusual so if you look
back into the historical record or
better yet the Paleo climate record
invariably you will find worse weather
events so TR so so that's part of the
time frame problem right it's like well
over what span do you evaluate these
events before you draw your conclusions
so but you can't so do you believe in do
you believe that any of the Tipping
Point hypotheses friends and told me
something interesting you know this was
a kind of a technical proposition he
said that in complex systems with many
degrees of freedom on the entropy front
so many ways they can potentially react
the probability of a Tipping Point
positive feedback loop you know like
that that runaway global warming or
something like that the melting of the
Greenland ice ice caps because we hit a
Tipping Point said in complex systems
that have multiple potential outcomes
that kind of all or none Tipping Point
is unlikely you get that more more
likely in a simple system that's
characterized by the probability of
radical State change like water freezing
for example and so I thought I I can't
evaluate that argument you know it's
outside of my domain of scientific
competence but it struck me as an
interesting idea well uh to some extent
it's true there is one sort of Tipping
Point
that we could encounter and if this does
happen I would expect that
human cause global warming would play
only a small part and this is the West
Antarctic ice sheet which is an unstable
ice sheet so if you took the ice sheet
away the continent would actually be
under water but what it is you have this
huge ice sheet that sits on the
continent and part of it's above water
okay and and it has an overhang and
because and this just dynamically
unstable situation and it moves fairly
fast
underneath this ice sheet are lots of
inactive volcanoes even the occasional
active volcano so if these volcanoes
became active and we had you know a
greater heat Source under this combined
with sea level rise and a little bit of
um
global warming
this could accelerate and on the time
scale of you know three or four
centuries we could see this collapse you
know which could lead to
a substantial sea level rise so so
that's the one
kind you know if we saw that happening
are there engineering ways of dealing
with it I don't know but it was
something that would be
a slow process but that's the only one
of the so-called tipping points
that I see could happen
because you know the
if there's going to be some solid earth
you know if the Earth what wants to have
an earthquake or a big volcanic eruption
you know there aren't a lot of you know
negative feedbacks in the earth system
to prevent that so to me that that's the
one like bad thing that could happen but
it would take centuries
um but the other ones yeah I don't see
it
so what do you think when you look at
the ipcc reports now and you look 50
years ahead or 100 years ahead what what
would you regard as a credible
representation of the so-called climate
science
what
do you accept the new IPC
prognostications or do you think the
models are so error ridden that even the
hypothesis of one to two degrees warming
isn't isn't reliable enough even though
it's the best we have well the
interesting thing is that the ipcc six
assessment report working group one
they also sort of rejected the climate
models to some extent they were Guided
by them in their projections but they
also
you know defined a plausible range of
climate sensitivity and looked at the
projections from there so even the ipcc
is stepping back from the global climate
models as being useful for projections
and people are going to these climate
emulators these simple climate models
well for this amount of warming you know
run it through a damaged model or an
economic assessment model or something
like that so people are really stepping
back from these big Global Climate
models and it's about time and one of
the
innovations that I've been undertaking
in my projection work and and this is
what I do for clients of my company
climate forecast applications network is
that I look at it I don't just look at
the ipcc scenarios and I choose the low
end ones I think those are more credible
but I also look at scenarios of what the
ocean circulations could be doing well
you know scenarios of volcanic eruptions
um and solar variation scenarios and try
to put forward a broader range of what
we might be looking at and so I have
like a network-based approach to combine
all this into producing a much broader
range of scenarios and at least over the
next three decades
like the natural variability piece of
this is pointing towards cooling rather
than amplifying the warming you know it
would Tamp down the global warming of
whatever magnitude it is from fossil
fuel emissions so that's the approach
that I'm taking
okay so let's go into that a bit you
earlier you indicated that you left the
university in 2017 to pursue an
entrepreneurial activity that you had
initiated at Georgia Tech and uh you
just made allusion to that again so so
tell me tell me if you would how you are
modeling and you've laid out some of the
conclusions but who's interested in your
models and obviously you're doing this
on an entrepreneurial basis so people
are willing to pay you for your opinion
which gives I think some what would you
say indication of their faith and its
credibility because people are actually
spending money on it like how are how
are your models different than the
models that are more broadly publicized
let's say and
um and who is it that is paying you to
produce these models why is there
interested in that and why are they
doing it okay well
insurance companies financial
institutions have an interest in
Atlantic hurricanes what are we looking
at over the next three decades in terms
of Atlantic hurricane activity a big
issue is a potential shift to the cold
phase of the Atlantic multi-decatal
oscillation this is one of those
multi-decatal oscillations
that I talked about which we would
expect would
start to Tamp down the Atlantic
hurricane activities so this is a very
big deal for them another client was
Wind Farm owners who wanted to know is
the wind going to keep blowing for the
next 30 Years and are my wind farms in
the right location
okay they wanted to know that
um some Electric utilities want to know
what could we be looking at in terms of
like how frequent these really bad
situations could be
you know for Renewable Power like a
massive cold air outbreak that lasts for
weeks the wind doesn't blow and it's
winter time and there's no sun you know
how bad can it get and how frequently
might these occur so these are some of
the things that I've been looking at and
also people interested in sea level rise
projections you know in their particular
location looking at scenarios of what
their location a lot of interest from
people in Florida San Francisco along
the Atlantic coast
um
you know what what could we be looking
at yeah yeah we see that those
projections from the the ipcc which of
those should we believe but we already
know that you know how are the ocean
circulation patterns going to influence
their local sea level rise what kind of
um
what kind of
what do I what kind of Trends do I see
for the vertical land motion both from
local effects and large
more planetary scale up and down kind of
affects so so those are some of the
projects that I've been working on
looking at scenarios out say 30 to 50
years
if you own a small to medium-sized
business that kept employees on payroll
through covid you may have a big cash
refund waiting for you the employee
retention credit is a tax credit of up
to twenty six thousand dollars per
employee right now more businesses than
ever qualify the experts at
refundspro.com can help you cut through
the red tape and qualify for this
government program most of their refunds
are over one hundred thousand dollars
even businesses that have received PPP
funds may be eligible and there are
absolutely no fees unless you receive a
refund there's no reason not to apply if
your business experience shutdowns
limited capacity supply chain challenges
or reduced Revenue due to covid you
likely qualify
refundspro.com has already helped
hundreds of businesses don't lose the
refund you're owed by missing the
deadline get started today with a free
five-minute questionnaire at
refundspro.com that's refunds with an s
pro.com
so why do these companies believe that
your models are credible enough for them
to pour economic resources into and why
do you believe that your Mortals are
credible enough to provide them with
accurate guidance I mean we talked about
some of the limitations of models and so
what what is it that you're doing that
is credible to the companies and why do
you believe scientifically that you're
providing accurate information okay the
first thing that I did and I did this
before
most other people did I say look
you're you're wasting your time looking
at that extreme emissions scenario
you know if you look at the
International Energy agency their
scenarios show emissions being fairly
flat for the next several decades and I
think this is a much more plausible
scenario so so let's focus on that one
and this is apart from
trying to predict what policy is going
to do and how much they're going to
change but
the thinking is now that emissions are
going to stay fairly flat for the next
few decades and I saw this and you know
I saw the journal Publications and this
is what I was pushing to my clients if
you want something realistic this is
what you should be looking at the other
thing is is
not accepting the extremely high values
of Ip of climate sensitivity to CO2
doubling I don't go as low as Richard
lindsen does but I'm certainly on the
low end and I justify why to them based
on Publications including some of my own
why we shouldn't be looking at these
very high sensitivity values and I run
it through a range so they can look but
I'm right but I'm saying you know so I
give them all the scenarios they want
I'll give the high emission scenario
I'll give the
High climate sensitivity low climate
sensity I'll say my best
judgment is that this is what it is but
then I uniquely put in scenarios of the
natural variability and they really like
this they get it I mean they've seen it
okay they've seen it and they understand
it's out there they've just never seen
anybody try to project it before and I
have Publications on this they can
parameterize their risk given your
plethora of models so they yeah here's
the worst case scenario here's the best
case scenario here's a here's the likely
scenario here's the range and then they
can calculate how to uh you know will
mitigate their risk across those
scenarios exactly I mean and a lot of
times they want to know well what's the
worst case what's the worst plausible
case okay and so I give them that and so
they have this whole range okay so so
for example in the Wind Farm
profitability study I gave them 81
scenarios
okay they're different scenarios of how
this could play out
over the next 30 Years and these
different you know there was a cluster
of scenarios you know in a certain area
and I say you know
you might infer that these are the most
plausible outcomes because there's
multiple different Pathways right for
reaching that but here's your plausible
worst case here's your plausible best
case okay and and this gives them some
information
okay for making their decision
um right so uh so you admit you admit
right up front in some sense that there
are inputs into your models that are
somewhat arbitrary right that that you
have to decide about and and those might
be for example your projections of of uh
carbon dioxide output and then you say
given a variety of initial assumptions
here's a variety of outcomes but a lot
of the models tend to converge at this
Vision you know this range of visions
and so if the convergence of multiple
models constitutes evidence which we
generally assume it does then this seems
to be the most plausible pathway right
and so how does that differ from the
iupcc approach okay well I don't say
it's the more well first they neglect
all the elements of natural variability
that I conclude they're not giving
scenarios of volcanic eruptions they're
not giving
um
different scenarios of sun activity
they don't have
that they do a bunch they have a bunch
of different scenario you know scenarios
of what the internal ocean variability
is doing but I can anchor it more
closely to what the observations are and
my own network model in terms of what
the plausible trajectories are so I'm
giving them a more plausible trajectory
for the
for the ocean oscillations and generally
going out 30 years these other scenarios
are cooler than the ipcc scenarios
well and so and do they actually do they
actually point to to cooling or just
less rapid warming some of them go as
far as cooling okay and others are less
rapid warming and there have been
another of Publications you never see
them publicize that show for certain
combinations of these ocean circulations
or volcanic eruptions or solar activity
that you could see cooling for a decade
or two during the 21st century
that could happen
and the ipcc ar-6 did you know if you
read the fine print deep in the chapters
you know you'll you'll see these papers
referenced and it is acknowledged but
it's not something
that you hear you know in the public
debate is just this Relentless warming
that we're going to be seeing okay okay
so so that's interesting because you
know the the warming
advocates
are doubtful enough about their own
prognostication so that it's no longer
appropriate to refer to global warming
you're supposed to refer to climate
change which I think is a terrible
sleight of hand but in any case that's
what's happened but nonetheless the the
apocalyptic prognostications are still
predicated on this idea of warming now
your claim is that the consensus that
that might be apocalyptic was never
there to begin with and the initial
estimates of the magnitude of warming
were out by about a factor of two partly
because people accepted equally
apocalyptic in some sense
prognostications of carbon dioxide
output but then you're taking that
further you're saying that the models
are so prone to variability that there
is some non-re non-trivial possibility
that there'll be a global cooling Trend
over the next 30 Years instead of a
global warming Trend and so in the face
of all that
someone might ask themselves well if the
situation with regards to these models
is as uncertain as you suggest and also
you know it's interesting just as an
aside that Financial companies will pay
you for your prognostications which is
another form of validation of your
opinion why in the world are we
stampeding madly to spend Untold
literally trillions of dollars trying to
ameliorate a problem that we haven't
properly measured like what's going on
here as far as you can tell okay you
have to go back okay the the policy
cart has been way out in front of the
scientific course from the very
beginning
in the 1980s the U.N environmental
program
you know was looking for something we
hate capitalism we don't like the oil
companies we like World Government all
this kind of thing and they latched on
to the climate chain the globe
the CO2
global warming is what it was called
back then and this seated you know the
night the you the formation of the UN
framework convention on climate change
and there was a treaty signed by 192
nations in 1992 including the US okay
this was before we knew anything we were
had to avoid dangerous anthropogenic
climate change before we had any idea of
any of this and so that this Frame the
climate problem you know in a very
narrow frame
um
all of climate is now caused by CO2 and
by definition warming is dangerous and
why was that such an attractive
political hypothesis like why did
politicians decide that in the absence
of this uh you know stringently produced
scientific evidence that the proper
place for the world's political
Community to focus was on the Cardinal
danger of global warming that was
anthropogenically produced like what the
hell is going on there especially
because it's so expensive okay well
people didn't pay much attention to it
for decades I mean the coyote protocol a
bunch of country in 1997 a bunch of
countries site on to reduce their
emissions but even the ones who signed
on didn't really reduce their Admissions
and of course the U.S never signed on
and reduced its emissions weirdly enough
so that's pretty funny I I know and it
wasn't really until the Paris agreement
that
they came up with you know this more
voluntary thing and then they started
phrasing it and there was a Spate of you
know bad weather Big El Nino and stuff
like that that they latched on to you
know the this extreme you know if we
just got rid of all this the weather
would be nicer we'd get rid of all these
floods and droughts and hurricanes and
whatever else and heat waves that was
plaguing humanity and so people bought
that kind of simple argument and then
once that there was a real shift in 2018
after the Paris agreement you know the
rhetoric was um you know climate crisis
climate emergency from the world leaders
the U.N President Obama macron Merkel
all of these leaders saying this but in
2018 people started paying attention and
Greta this is when Greta thundberg
came onto the scene and she was she's a
remarkable person and she's wrong a lot
of things but a remarkable person
nevertheless but but this what she was
doing spawned the sunrise movement
Extinction Rebellion all this kind of
stuff and and the journalists Amplified
this the climate crisis the climate
emergency
ten years ago climate even 10 years ago
climate change was like really a fringe
Topic at journals now major media
Outlets have a climate desk you know I
have a whole team of journalists and and
and there's huge money going into things
like carbon brief things that Focus
specifically on climate change and so
it's just exploded and again there's
this social contract between the policy
makers the media and the scientists it's
great for the sign there's nobody 10
years ago people with a PhD in climate
science
you know what would be trying to get a
postdoc and whatever and now the
universities can't even hang on to them
there's so many jobs in the media and
the private sector that you know this is
just a hot thing every University now
has some sort of climity
um Department Institute it's just big
business for everybody and so there's
this Mutual reinforcement between the
the scientists the policy makers and the
media so that's where the positive
feedback loops are that's right right
they're on the sociological side yeah
definitely definitely yeah well it's
quite something to behold so now what
has been the consequences I mean you've
been pilloried I believe I don't believe
I'm overstating this you've been
pilloried or satirized as a sort of
Fringe figure on the client denial front
I think that's fair to say and it's
pretty easy to smear someone with
tactics like that and it's
psychologically very effective mean what
has it you you know you said you Rose to
public prominence partly because you
formulated an argument at least to begin
with that was that could be latched onto
by the climate apocalypse and quite
effectively and but then you you you
produced all sorts of other material
um mitigating producing a mitigated view
what's been the consequence for you of
of being involved in this okay let me
tell you what my sin was
people don't object to my science
I mean I'm I'm within
you know
the likely range of the ipcc for the
most part on the low end but you know I
it's not Fringe perspectives and I
commonly cite the ipcc
what happened the the reason I was
shuffled off into denier Camp is because
I criticized the behavior
of climate scientists I criticized the
ipcc
for some ethical violations as well as
not paying enough attention to
uncertainty so that was my sin okay I
offended and criticized the grand pubas
of the climate community and then I was
very quick and most importantly in was
it 2011 I criticized Michael Mann's
hockey stick
um on my blog and then he started
calling me a denier and that was really
the beginning of the end so my sin yeah
so let's talk about that terminology for
a second just so everybody knows so this
is quite the rhetorical move on the part
of the climate the the climate purveyors
of apocalyptic doom and so we already
established in our society broadly
speaking in the west that to object to
the idea that the Holocaust was a
historical reality puts you outside the
pale of normative and reasonable
political discussion and so you can be a
holocaust denier and if you are such a
creature then you're lumped in with the
Nazis and put on the shelf for no
further contact right you're you've
you've entered the realm of the
reprehensible now one of the most
effective rhetorical moves of the people
who are making a great living or putting
themselves forward morally as climate
apocalyptic doomsayers was to Target
people who objected to their views with
terminology that was derived directly
from that rhetorical move so now if
you're a climate change denier the
connotation is you occupy the same
category morally as people who refuse to
believe on the grounds of their
appalling anti-Semitism and their blind
historical ignorance that the Holocaust
was a historical reality and so in some
sense there's no real difference between
labeling someone a climate change denier
and labeling labeling them a Nazi
enabler and the rhetorical move was
designed precisely to produce that
outcome and so I'm not I'm not a big fan
of that kind of return Oracle move and
let's talk about Michael Mann for a
second too now because a lot of people
listening and watching they're not going
to know what that hockey stick graph was
and they don't know what Cardinal role
the Scandal around that graph has
produced in the in the discussion so do
you want to walk through the hockey
stick graph a little bit okay if you go
back to 2001 this was the release of the
third assessment report from the ipcc
and Sir John Houghton who was the head
of the ipcc was giving the press release
and the backdrop behind him was this
image a curve that looked like a hockey
stick which was meant to portray that
you know the climate was very stable for
the last thousand years and all of a
sudden you've got this big uptick
you know that is caused by humans okay
and this was
um based on the work of Michael Mann it
was a recent PhD this was his post-doc
work before the ink was dry on his PhD
he was appointed um a lead author of The
ipcc which was a fairly unusual move to
a point that's an insane move let me let
everybody watching and listening no like
your PhD is the is putting your foot in
the or your toe in the water of
scientific endeavor
so I mean so Judith has 190 Publications
and just so those you were listening no
generally speaking a PhD thesis requires
approximately as much work as three
scientific Publications if it's a high
quality PhD and so when you get your PhD
um you've you've entered the domain of
genuine scientific contribution the PHD
is actually a marker of that and if you
do a postdoc that means that you you
have the opportunity to to do a little
bit more research work to establish your
credibility now as a more independent
researcher who isn't dependent on the
ideas of your supervisor so you're a
neophyte you're a beginner when you do a
PhD in a postdoc and maybe you're you
have to do one or maybe two and then
maybe you can get hired as a junior
Professor but you're by no means at the
peak of your career and it's very very
rare for initiatory research that might
be done at the PHD level to be regarded
as canonical unless you're a Nobel
prize-winning you know genius by the
scientific community and so the fact
that man's work got so much attention
even though it was done at this initial
level of scientific investigation I mean
that doesn't speak to its validity but
my point is it's an aberration in the in
the process and it also points to this
problem we discussed earlier of time
frame I mean when you construct graphs
you can play with their psychological
impact and all sorts of inappropriate
ways you can expand and contract the
time frame you can expand and contract
the scale on the left and you can make
what's really a small effect across some
historical span of time look big by
playing with the with the scale and you
can make up an effect that isn't very
large temporally speaking by shrinking
the time scale of evaluation and so the
man's graph showed this uptick in
climate transformation that was
attendant on human industrial activity
but he picked a very narrow time frame
and a very particularized scale so that
this maximized the psychological impact
of the graph and so but that does bring
us to this problem of time scale it's
like well and variability how much has
things changed over ten thousand years
like what's the right time scale here
and that's a very difficult problem well
the issues of the hockey stick were not
so much
that
um
the the trigger the hockey stick trigger
the important one is around 2 000 right
after that this was viewed by a mining
engineer
um Steve McIntyre said hockey stick
hockey stick I've seen these things this
is usually a con game trying to get
somebody to buy mining stocks he says
you know then he got intrigued he wanted
to look at the data so he asked for the
data they gave him some of it and he and
um Ross McKittrick
Canadian economics professor took a look
at this and they found all sorts of
Errors you know mishandling of data
inappropriate statistical methods on and
on it goes and
man went after these guys big time
rather than you know
destructively trying to deal with these
criticisms he went after these guys and
has turned into a pretty big flame war
and then McIntyre and McKittrick
published two additional papers in 2005
and the controversy you know was just
explosive there were Congressional
hearings on this and on and on it went
so it was this huge controversy and
these climate gate emails that were
released in 2009 revealed all sorts of
skull dodgery you know trying to keep
data away from McIntyre and McKittrick
trying to
put pressure on Journal editors not to
publish their papers and on and on it
goes and and you know and so this was
revealed in climate gate
so those were more egregious sins than
just picking a convenient time frame and
a convenient scale oh yeah yeah no but
but there is a graphical issue and this
is was the theme of my blog post hiding
the decline so the Paleo climate record
just you know showed these little
oscillations and to get that sort of
hockey stick piece they spliced on the
observational record on top of that okay
and
it wasn't clear in the ipcc report that
was that was done it was sort of in some
sort of a footnote or an obscure
reference but it never occurred to me as
someone in the field that this is what
had been done so no I don't understand
that go go into that more detail I don't
understand exactly what what was done
there okay you see the handle okay if
you look at the actual pre the tree ring
rate data that went into their analysis
it was just like
the flat handle in order to get the
blade the uptick of the blade they
spliced on the historical temperature
record completely different data set oh
oh I see because the tree rings weren't
showing this uptick
um this is a so-called hide the decline
um and so you know to me this is
something
without doing that is a bad idea but
doing that without explaining it is
marginal and and
this is known in some circles
subsequently would be given a label as
image fraud
um and so this is what I wrote my blog
post about and I wasn't particularly
attacking man because he wasn't the only
person involved in this little
um
deception
but
you know this got a lot of attention and
apparently Michael Mann was unhappy and
pretty soon after that you know he was
calling me denier on Twitter and then I
started appearing on all these
misinformer lists and by 2012 you know I
was firmly established as a denier and
this the the Society of environmental
journalists put together a a list a
description of all the climate blogs and
my blog was under the list of denier
blogs and the description says unlike
most other denier blogs Curry is a real
scientist she looks at both sides of the
issues digs deeps into the issues
discusses the uncertainties and all this
other stuff and I said well that's a
beautiful description of my blog but why
did they accept prima facie that my blog
is a denier Blog I mean it just shows
how pervasive and how stupid this whole
thing was so I you know I got tossed
into the denier camp
um I don't align myself
with either side you know I I
preciously fought for my Independence
which included resigning my academic
position so you know I think for myself
I think deep I look at the evidence make
judgments
um and it's mostly about trying to
better characterize uncertainties and
what we don't know this is a key part of
rational policy making is to understand
the uncertainties of what we don't know
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest ethical Spirit to
which we're beholden is presented
precisely as that spirit that allies
itself with the cause of Freedom against
tyranny I want villains to get punished
but do you want the villains to learn
before they have to pay the ultimate
price that's such a Christian question
well we've got we've got a three-fold
problem here by the sounds of things in
some real sense I mean the first problem
is kind of a positive feedback loop that
you alluded to is that a lot of
attention was paid to this potential
issue a lot of money was put into
funding investigation into it that
incentivized the growth of a huge
scientific Enterprise that incentivized
people who were primarily motivated by
the money including the grants and I
mean it's hard not to be motivated by
that if you want to be a practicing
scientist and so there was a lot of
Financial and practical pressure to
produce a an environmentally apocalyptic
story and then you can imagine that's
Amplified by the fact that
reporting that there's no problem on the
climate front is not something that's
going to produce an attention-grabbing
headline especially in the era of
declining attention being played to paid
to Legacy Media outlets and so we know
perfectly well that human beings are
much more sensitive to negative
information comparatively speaking than
to positive information and that you can
attract attention with a story of gloom
and threat much more effectively than
one that states there's no story here at
all or something positive so that's a
big problem and then the third problem I
would say is that it's easy for venal
and narcissistic politicians and that's
not all of them to latch on to a
convenient money generating apocalyptic
nightmare to put themselves forward as
white Knights on the moral front and to
pull the wool over the eyes and maybe
even their own eyes in relationship to
whether or not they're making any
practical progress in the actual world
and so there's a situation where we have
a set of positive feedback loops right
operating in sociological space that are
producing a kind of Chicken Little
outcome and so we're running around
claiming that the sky is falling and
dumping tilting our economic systems in
a dangerous Direction and spending
Untold hundreds of billions of dollars
addressing a problem that is ill-defined
and likely nowhere near of the magnitude
that we think it is and so and then I I
want to I want to follow that with uh I
tried to make a strong case for why you
might be regarded with a certain degree
of apprehension
from the perspective of the climate
apocalypse but I'm also curious about
this the piece of data that has really
emerged as most striking to me
on the environmental front over the last
20 years is the recent observations or
they've been going on for about five
years or ten years perhaps that one of
the consequences of except extra carbon
dioxide output is that the planet has
greened
15 since the dawn of the Millennia and
that most of that Greening has taken
place in what would have otherwise been
semi-arid and rather denuded areas and
so I don't see a statistic on the
anti-carbon front that's as powerful
negatively as the statistic that the
planet is 15 Greener and that our crops
are also in a consequence quite a lot
more productive on the pro carbon
dioxide front so you know you made the
claim earlier that maybe we're in for a
period of cooling that's within the
error predictions of the models but I
would like to say well why shouldn't I
look at the fact that the planet has got
15 percent greener in 15 years that's an
area bigger than the United States and
say well why are we so sure that carbon
dioxide output is a bad thing at all
I mean some of the people who are
initially hypothesized about the
greenhouse effect were quite effusive in
their predictions that this would
produce a Greener more Lush and more
productive World a more habitable world
so is is it is it unreasonable to put
that forward as a proposition
um
again the apocalypse types are pushing
extreme weather events as being caused
by warming you know the Hurricanes the
Pakistan flooding the heat waves you
know unusual this that and the other
this is what they're pushing as being
caused by warming you know it's
conceivable that there is some
element
of contribution
from fossil fuel warming to this but
it's because of the large
amount of natural weather and climate
variability it's impossible to discern I
mean if we were to immediately stop
emitting fossil fuels
we probably wouldn't notice any change
in the weather you know throughout the
rest of the 21st Century
so the this is the key error in logic
that people have been made well I mean
it's
it's not an error in logic it's a it's a
very effective selling point for the
alarmist but people have bought it and
people have weather Amnesia I mean if
you just look back to the 50s to the the
1950s to the 1930s or whatever the
weather was much worse certainly in
North America
um so it's just something that doesn't
make sense does that mean we should just
keep amping up the fossil fuel emissions
no we just really don't quite understand
the consequences of this but but neither
does it imply that we should um
urgently
reduce emissions and disrupt the global
energy systems that will make people
less off and you know less well-off and
more vulnerable to whatever extreme
weather and climate events might happen
to occur so so we're hurting ourselves
but we're not doing much in the way of
reducing emissions anyways
and we're just making ourselves less
prosperous and more vulnerable
to extreme weather events well okay so
there's there's two consequences of that
I would say is the first is if we do
make people less well off by making
energy much more expensive by
restricting fossil fuel use like
unreasonably let's say or by not
pursuing nuclear power for example as an
alternative the major consequence of
that will be that a lot of poor people
who are right on the edge and there's
lots of them are poorer than they need
to be and will be you know off the edge
and the consequence of that is as you
already pointed out that if anything
untoward does happen on the weather
front they're going to be much more
vulnerable to that like I mean
distinguishing between infrastructure
inadequacy and whether catastrophe is
very very difficult even when Katrina
hit New Orleans you could say that it
was a natural disaster but you could
also say it was an abject failure of
planning because the Army Corps of
engineer dikes were only designed to
withstand a one in a hundred year storm
whereas when the judge build dikes they
designed them to withstand a one in ten
thousand year storm so whether that was
a natural disaster or a consequence of
human foolishness is not precisely
obvious and the same thing applies on
the energy front you know if we
impoverish the already poor by making
energy expensive not only do we expose
them to much more risk to life and limb
let's say in property but we also
decrease the probability that those
self-same people are going to be able to
take an environmentally oriented view
because the data indicates that if you
can get people up to producing or
benefiting from economic growth to the
tune of about five thousand dollars a
year in average GDP then they start to
take a medium to long-term view of the
future and start to attend much more
carefully to what you might describe as
environmental concerns
so panicking about climate in the way
that we're doing if the consequence is
to raise Energy prices and impoverish
people looks like it's going to kill
more people first because they'll be
more vulnerable and second that it's
going to make it's going to deliver us
far fewer people who are capable of
taking the kind of medium to long-term
view of sustainability that would be
actually beneficial to producing a a
more livable planet and I still want to
ask your opinion about The Greening
um yeah the greetings happening I think
it's attributed mostly to carbon dioxide
but also more rainfall and warmer
temperatures I mean Health
um so so The Greening is definitely a
benefit
um
that
The Greening is happening over a big big
portion of the globe actually
um so it's um it's clearly a benefit
um well it's also so perverse eh because
one of the it's it's as perverse is the
fact that the Americans decrease their
carbon output by returning to fracking
nobody predicted that but here we have a
situation where not only is the planet
not getting Browner and drier which was
the apoplectic apocalyptic Vision but
many of the areas that were really Brown
and dry like the southern edge of the
Sahara Desert are actually seeing the
Ingress of vegetation in a manner that's
well unprecedented even up to 15 years
ago and so you know not only is that not
what was predicted it's the very
opposite of what's predicted and it's
it's it's the opposite in a in a very
very massive manner I mean 15 percent
increase recent Greening is just it's
almost beyond comprehension as I said
that's an area bigger than the
continental United States and and then
to say as well that that's also produced
quite an increment in the productivity
of human crops and enabled us to grow
more food in less area it's like that's
those are facts that need to be taken
with dead seriousness they're very
positive perhaps I mean you could argue
that maybe that rate of vegetation
change brings with it threats that we
haven't yet envisioned and that could be
the case but nonetheless this it
certainly isn't the spreading of the
deserts that we were led to be
apprehensive of
um well that's correct again the framing
of this that going back to 1992 was
around dangerous
anthropogenic interference in the
climate system so the focus was on
dangers they were looking for dangers
the benefits
you know weren't even acknowledged
until
maybe the fifth assessment report in the
ipcc I mean everything they were just
looking for dangers
um that there was no counterweight of
the benefits so right right and no cost
benefit analysis analysis I mean I've
talked to Bjorn lomberg a lot yeah and
the reason for that was that well I
looked through all the data that you're
describing for a long period of time one
of the things that struck me
instruct me as well about the
multiplicity of goals that the UN was
hypothetically pursuing was that no one
was assessing these risks and benefits
in any systematic manner ranking them
and then I came across Lombard's work
and he tried to do a cost benefit
analysis looking at our capacity to
adapt and ranking the problems that face
Us in terms of their severity and also
what we could do about those problems in
some effective Manner and like Lumber
like you accepts the ipcc
prognostications of a mild warming Trend
over the next hundred years but he's
done calculations showing that the net
consequence of that even if it is uh
somewhat detrimental economically if we
Factor all those costs into account is
that we'll be less more Rich than we
would otherwise be right because our GDP
is going to increase something like 400
percent on average in the next hundred
years and one of the negative
consequences of global warming will be
that it'll be slightly less than 400
percent and that it's clear that we can
manage that in any real sense and that
we're very good at adapting to a huge
range of weather other situations and
and climate scenarios some of us live in
damn near Arctic conditions and other
people live in the desert and so it's
not outside the realm of human
adaptation to adapt to a one or two
degree climate transformation and
animals should be able to do the same
assuming that we don't you know that
we're reasonably intelligent on the
Environmental Conservation front and so
I don't know are you aware of
laurenburg's work oh yeah no I've Bjorn
and I are in close contact and I'm very
well aware of what he's doing and he's
doing a very good job of making those
points
um you know the thing that you know the
U.N has the 17 sustainability goals I
think the first one is to um
eliminate poverty the second one is to
eliminate hunger or maybe number seven
is um
energy affordable energy for all the
number 13 is climate action
and you've got to wonder how did climate
action even one piece of that which is
you know elimination of fossil fuels
come to Trump
um
pot elimination of poverty and
elimination of hunger development aid
from the U.N from the World Bank and
whatever is now focused on mitigation
the traditional objectives of Economic
Development and help with adaptation
those are put on the back burner
right right that's in favor of
mitigation and this is making that's
insane this is making people less
well-off and we're squandering
opportunities for human development and
you know it for senseless
objectives that aren't expected to
improve anyone's life over the course of
the 21st century and could very well
make us all worse off okay so well well
so this is part of the
incomprehensibility of this to me
because it looks to me like a lot of the
arguments for example that would force
us to take the apocalyptic
prognostications of the doomsayer
seriously the moral arguments go
something like this well you know
a hundred years if there's a lot of
climate change
it's primarily going to be the world's
poor who pay the largest price for that
the world's poor and oppressed and to
mitigate against that we have to adopt
policies that however painful they are
in the short term will mitigate against
that because of our concern for the
long-term viability of let's say these
poverty-stricken people but the problem
with that is that the models aren't very
reliable and it's absolutely 100 percent
certain that if we raise Energy prices
which we have been doing quite
effectively and food prices we're going
to make life much more difficult for
impoverished people throughout the
developing world right now and in a way
that's going to kill plenty of people
and it's certainly going to deprive many
others of educational opportunity and
nutritional nutritional optimal
nutritional input and all of that 100
certain that's going to occur but the
moral the morale moral aspect is well we
shouldn't be doing things that would
endanger those people who are oppressed
and poor but the call policies we're
pursuing do precisely that so I again I
I'm still left with this complete
incapacity to understand how this can
possibly be the case I I don't get it
because there's lots of other things we
could be doing
well leaders in Africa are quite
outspoken they're on the front lines of
being the victims of all this they refer
to Green colonialism energy apartheid
you know that they're facing over this
um global warming policies right right
right and they can't they can't get
loans from development Banks to build
you know they have plenty of fossil
natural gas coal a lot of fossil fuel
resources in Africa they can't get loans
to build their own power plants the only
thing that they're able to do is sell
their fuel
to Europe so Europe is exploiting them
doubly by taking their fuel but not
allowing you know it's Politically
Incorrect for these Banks to fund the
development of power plants so right to
develop their own economy it's just evil
and I think green colonialism and energy
apartheid are perfect descriptors for
what's going on well it's it's just it's
just again it leaves me open most in
amazement that we in the developed world
with our functional economies and our
high level of luxury and security
can say to developing Worlds the
developing World well you know we've got
it pretty good here and we're probably
willing to cut back a little bit but you
guys down there in the developing
countries you know you should be pretty
damn careful about your carbon output
because you know we've only got one
planet and so it isn't really obvious
that any of you should have the same
kind of benefits that we have the planet
can't sustain that level of luxury and
security and so we're just not going to
let you have any money
we're not going to help you develop your
economy so that you can benefit from the
same Industrial Revolution that have
that has that has that has enabled us to
educate our children and to have plenty
to eat and to be warm in the winter and
cool in the summer and then what's all
even more Preposterous is it's the very
people who are constantly clamoring
about the oppressive nature of Western
culture who are foisting this very story
on these developed countries yeah the
irony is that even if the African
nations
were given you know the carbon credits
or whatever and allowed to develop
to where they want to be and where
anyone expects them to be
at most they would be emitting like five
or six percent of global emissions and
this is for like a billion people in the
population so we're not talking about a
lot of extra emissions to allow them to
develop I mean it just makes absolutely
no sense and it's evil it's absolutely
Yeah well yeah yeah yeah yeah that's
that's how it looks to me too well I'm
glad to hear that you're in regard
Lombard as a credible oh absolutely a
commentator on such things well you know
I've looked I've looked across a wide
variety of political and scientific
thinkers over a 20-year period trying to
identify people that I believe to be
credible on the interface between
economic development and energy and
Environmental Management and I I like
shellenberger
um I think Epstein has some interesting
things to say I like Marion tupi
um
um what's there's the the English what's
what's his name um
Richard told Matt Ridley I think Matt
Ridley is good yeah yeah and so but of
all those people I think laurenburg has
done the most credible job and he's also
been given a damn rough ride in the
media I mean he's doing pretty well now
I think promoting his message which is a
it's such a lovely what he lays out is
such a lovely scenario because he shows
how much good we could do in the world
especially with regard to the
amelioration of absolute poverty and the
provision of education at such a tiny
fraction of the amounts of money that
are being devoted to this insane
what prevention of a non-existent
climate apocalypse and why you know I've
been doing everything I can for whatever
it's worth to draw attention to his work
but uh you know the fact that he's been
pilloried like like you've been pillory
is makes it
well there's always a question lurking
in the back of my mind it's sort of like
well where there's smoke there's fire if
people are constantly being attacked for
their views on moral grounds you know
maybe there's something to that but I
certainly I haven't been able to find
that my analysis of your work or Francis
I certainly have seen none of that
whatsoever in relationship to laurenburg
so the mystery Still Remains for me okay
they went after lombborg early on you
know
2003 whatever following his book The
skeptical environmentalists and the
issue
was
that he didn't regard you know the
reduction of fossil fuel emissions as
the be-all and end-all you know there
were more important things to do and for
that he got labeled you know that that
was a very dangerous perspective because
they were just so set on this one
particular policy
um yeah for reasons for poorly Justified
reasons and for reasons that became
harder to justify as time went on and
they're still stuck on this and it just
defies logic and it's going to cause a
lot of damage in the world it defies
logic unless your primary goal is easy
moral virtue so imagine you know the
problem with Lombard's work
fundamentally and this is the problem
with marketing it too is that he offers
a multivariate and multi-dimensional
Analysis of the problems besetting the
world he says well we don't just have
one problem climate apocalypse we have
like 100 problems and then we have the
problem of how to rank order these
problems and then we have the problem of
generating actual Solutions and
assessing them and that's actually
requires a lot of cognitive effort you
know to walk through those and so and
but where if you're a climate apocalypse
you can reduce the entire panoply of
human problems to one problem and then
you can put yourself forward as a moral
person by just saying well I'm
definitely concerned about the fate of
the planet and that's all anybody
reasonable should be concerned about and
because I'm concerned in that manner I'm
a fully credible and reputationally
remarkable person and that's part of the
psychological proclivity that is is
behind this okay and so everything bad
that happens someone finds a path to
blame it on climate change
okay and yeah and the media amplifies it
and this gives politicians an easy out
so rather than dealing with their real
problems you know
poor land use poor regulations poor
whatever inadequate infrastructure
whatever might be the cause of their
actual problems they simply blame it on
global warming and so that it gives them
an easy out
yeah I read an article yesterday that
climate change was increasing the risk
that women were being abused in their
homes
that was just a classic example you know
I mean you know you could make the case
that whatever produces economic
instability is going to raise the roots
you know the rates of abuse but to link
it directly to climate change is a
really egregious example of exactly the
kind of thing that you're describing all
right well look on we're out of time on
this segment I'm going to talk to Dr
Curry for an additional half an hour on
the daily wire plus platform for those
of you who are watching and listening
you might be interested in that where
I'm going to talk about the development
of her interest in in her scientific
Endeavors and and in her entrepreneurial
Endeavors as well
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com